Updating development docs (#212)
ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm: docs/source/development/overview.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.8
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: pyrealm_python3
---

# Developing `pyrealm`

This page gives an overview of the process of contributing code to the `pyrealm`
package, along with the development environment and tools you will need to setup to work
with the codebase.

## Contributing code

The workflow for contributing code to `pyrealm` is:

1. Decide what you want to work on. This could be an existing bug or feature request or
   could be something new. If it is new, then create an new issue on Github describing

>    what you want to change or add. The issue tracker provides templates for bugs and

Reviewer: It would be useful to link the website for issues here.

1. Use the Github issue page interface to create a branch for the issue. The branch name
   will start with the issue number, which makes branches much easier to track.

1. Check that branch out locally and make commits to it, pushing them to GitHub
   regularly. Do try and make frequent small commits with clear, specific commit
   messages.

1. Create a pull request (PR) from the issue branch onto the `develop` branch. The PR
   description should tag the issue being addressed and explain how the incoming code
   fixes the issue. You can start a PR as 'draft' PR: this can be a useful way to start
   describing a PR content and checking that testing is passing before opening a PR up
   for review.

1. Check that the continuous integration testing passes and fix any issues causing test
   failures.

1. Request reviews from other package developers. A PR cannot be merged into `develop`
   until at least one approving review has been added to the code. Reviews will often
   suggest changes to the code and you should discuss those suggestions and implement
   them.

1. Once a PR has been approved, the PR can be merged into `develop` and the branch can
   be deleted.

> ## The package development environment

Author: @vgro - I wasn't entirely sure what you meant but have added this right at the top. Does that cover it?

https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/blob/10643965705f4acdd38adbfdab2de96c73e9b701/docs/source/development/overview.md?plain=1#L21-L38

> ## The package development environment

Reviewer: I meant something different but I think it also makes sense as it is. I like this addition 👍

The short descriptions below provide the key commands needed to set up your development
environment and provide links to more detailed descriptions of code development for
`pyrealm`.

### Python environment

You will need to install Python 3.10 or greater to develop `pyrealm`. We recommend using
`pyenv` or `pyenv-win` to manage your Python installations but this is only really
needed if you want to be able to test your code on different python versions.

### Package management

We use [`poetry`](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation) for dependency
management and for managing development environments and you will need to install it.

### Installing `pyrealm`

To develop `pyrealm`, you will also need to install [`git`](https://git-scm.com/) and
then clone the `pyrealm` GitHub repository.

```sh
git clone https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm.git
```

You can now use `poetry` to install the package dependencies. This is not just the
package requirements for end users of the package, but also a wider set of tools used in

> package development. The `poetry` tools uses the

Reviewer: I think there is on 's' too many in `tools uses`?

[pyproject.toml](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/blob/develop/pyproject.toml)
file to configure the dependencies that will be installed.

```bash
poetry install
```

Poetry uses a virtual environment for package development: all packages are installed to
a stand-alone python environment that is only used for `pyrealm` development. This makes
sure that the development environment is consistent across python versions and different

> developers. It does mean you need to put `poetry run` before command to run commands in

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear, maybe just a word missing. Do you mean 'put poetry run before every command to run commands'?

Author: I've added more detail.

that environment or `poetry shell` to start a new shell that specifically uses that
environment.

> 

Reviewer: Would it be worth mentioning `poetry update` here?

Author: 💯 I've added a section on updating and the lock file.

You should now be able to run the following command to see that `pyrealm` is installed
and is showing the current version.

```sh
poetry run python -c "import pyrealm; print(pyrealm.__version__)"
```

### Installing and using `pre-commit`

Development of the `pyrealm` package uses [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/). This
is a python tool that runs a set of checks on `git` commits and stops the commit from
completing when any of those checks fail. We use `pre-commit` to help catch a wide range

> of common issues and make sure that all code pushed to the GitHub repository meets some

Reviewer: It would be nice to have an example of a common issue or maybe mention what it does NOT capture

Author: Hard to say what it doesn't capture, but I've added a brief description and moved the details link closer.

simple quality assurance checks and uses some common formatting standards.

The `pre-commit` tool is installed by the `poetry install` step above, so you now need

> to install the `pyrealm` configuration for `precommit` and run the tool to set up the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to install the `pyrealm` configuration for `pre-commit` and run the tool to set up the
```

get your computer set up to run them. It is a good idea to start off with a small
contribution in order to get used to the workflow - please do reach out to other
developers for help in getting things to work if you run into problems. We will expect
you to have read this document and the linked details pages, but we do not expect them
to be a perfect or complete explanation!

## Contributing code

The workflow for contributing to `pyrealm` is:

1. Decide what you want to work on. This could be an existing bug or feature request or
   could be something new. If it is new, then create an new issue on Github describing
   what you want to change or add. The issue tracker provides templates for bugs and
   feature requests: please do provide as much detail as possible on the bug or the
   feature you would like to provide. If you want to work on an existing issue, then
   just add a comment and say you would like to work on it.

   [https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/issues](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/issues)

   Whatever issue you do want to work on, do give other developers a chance to comment

>    on suggestions before putting a lot of effort in!

Author: It is.

   [https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/issues](https://github.com/ImperialCollegeLondon/pyrealm/issues)

   Whatever issue you do want to work on, do give other developers a chance to comment
   on suggestions before putting a lot of effort in!

1. Use the Github issue page interface to create a branch for the issue. The branch name
   will start with the issue number, which makes branches much easier to track.

1. Check that branch out locally and make commits to it, pushing them to GitHub
   regularly. Do try and make frequent small commits with clear, specific commit
   messages.

1. Create a pull request (PR) from the issue branch onto the `develop` branch. The PR
   description should tag the issue being addressed and explain how the incoming code
   fixes the issue. You can start a PR as 'draft' PR: this can be a useful way to start
   describing a PR content and checking that testing is passing before opening a PR up
   for review.

1. Check that the continuous integration testing passes and fix any issues causing test
   failures.

1. Request reviews from other package developers. A PR cannot be merged into `develop`

>    until at least one approving review has been added to the code. Reviews will often

Author: There isn't currently - small team. I think if we started getting lots of people coming in, we'd make a core team that is needed to sign off. I'll add a note to add me in the first instance.

   suggest changes to the code and you should discuss those suggestions and implement
   them.

> 1. Once a PR has been approved, the PR can be merged into `develop` and the branch can

Author: We don't have one and I haven't thought about it!

page](./documentation.md) for details.

In order to build the documentation, you will need to register the `poetry` virtual
enviroment, so that it can be used by `jupyter` and `myst` to build dynamic content.
This only needs to be done once.

```bash
poetry run python -m ipykernel install --user --name=pyrealm_python3
```

After that, the following code can be used to build the documentation

```bash
# Build docs using sphinx
cd docs
poetry run sphinx-build -W --keep-going source build
```

### GitHub Actions

We use GitHub Action workflows to update `pre-commit`, run code quality checks on pull
requests, and to automate profiling and release publication. See the [GitHub Actions
page](./github_actions.md) for details.

### Package version releases

We use trusted publishing from GitHub releases to release new versions of `pyrealm` to
[PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/pyrealm/). Releases are also picked up and archived on
[Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8366847). See the [release process
page](./release_process.md) for details.

## Setup script example

The scripts below bundle all the commands together to show the set up process, including

> using `pyenv` to mangage `python` versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using `pyenv` to mangage `python` versions, ending by running the unit tests. This sets up everything you need, ready to start developing on pyrealm.
```

:::{admonition} Setup script

``` sh
#!/bin/bash

# pyenv and poetry use sqlite3

> sudo apt install sqlite3 sqlite3-doc libsqlite3-dev

Reviewer 2: I didn't find it was necessary to install these dependencies on my local install, but that might be because I used homebrew to install pyenv.
